As we discussed in the first
week of the course,
one of the key challenges in machine
learning is finding the right
features to use as input to a learning
model for a particular problem.
This is called feature engineering and
can be part art, and part science.
It can also be the single most factor
in doing well on a learning task.
Sometimes, in fact,
more often more important than
the choice of the model itself.
We'll discuss this further in
the last week of the course.
Because of the difficulty
of feature engineering,
there's been a lot of research on
what's called feature learning or
feature extraction algorithms that
can find good features automatically.
This brings us to deep learning.
At a high-level,
one of the advantages of deep learning is
that it includes a sophisticated automatic
featured learning phase as part
of its supervised training.
Moreover, deep learning is called deep.
Because this feature extraction typically
doesn't use just one feature learning
step, but a hierarchy of
multiple feature learning layers.
Each feeding into the next.
Here's one simplified example of what a
deep learning architecture might look like
in practice for an image recognition task.
In this case, digit recognition.
Recognizing a handwritten digit
from zero to nine, for example.
You can see the automatic feature
extraction step made up of hierarchy of
feature layers.
Each of which is based on a network that
does convolution which can be thought of
as a filter for a specific pattern
followed by a subsampling step,
also known as pooling that
can detect a translated or
rotated version of that
feature anywhere in the image.
So that features are detected properly for
the final classification step,
which is implemented as
a fully connected network.
The subsampling step also has the effect
of reducing the computational complexity
of the network.
Depending on the properties of the object
we want to predict, for example.
If we care only about the presence of the
object in the image compared to let's say,
specific location, the subsampling
part of the architecture may or
may not be included and this is only one
example of a deep learning architecture.
The size, structure and
other properties may look very different.
Depending on the specific
learning problem.
This image from a paper by Honglak Lee and
colleagues at the University of Michigan
shows an illustration of multilayer
feature learning for face recognition.
Here there are three groups from left
to right corresponding to first,
second and
third stages of feature learning.
The matrix at each stage shows a set
of image features with one feature per
square.
Each feature can be thought
of as a detector or filter,
that lights up when that pattern is
present in the underlying image.
The first layer of their deep learning
architecture extracts the most primitive
low-level features, such as edges and
different kinds of blobs.
The second layer creates new
features from combinations of
those first layer features.
For faces, this might correspond to
key elements that capture shapes of
higher level features like noses or eyes.
The third layer in turn,
creates new features from combinations
of the second layer of features.
Forming still higher level features
that capture typical face types and
facial expressions.
Finally, all of these features
are used as input to the final
supervised learning step,
namely the face classifier.
Here are the feature layers that result
from training on different types of
objects, cars, elephants,
chairs and a mixture of objects.
These kinds of complex features can't be
learned from a small number of layers.
Advances in both algorithms and
computing power allow current deep
learning systems to train architectures
that could have dozens of layers of
nonlinear, hierarchical features.
It turns out that the human brain does
something quite related to this when
processing visual information.
There are specific neurocircuits that
first do low-level feature extraction,
such as edge detection and
finding the frequency of repeated patterns
which are then used to compute more
sophisticated features to help
estimate things like simple shapes and
their orientation or whether a shape
is in the foreground or background.
Followed by further layers of
higher level visual processing
that support more complex tasks,
such as face recognition and
interpreting the motion of
multiple moving objects.
On the position side, deep learning
systems have achieved impressive gains and
have achieved state-of-the-art
performance on many difficult tasks.
Deep learning's automatic feature
extraction mechanisms also reduce the need
for human guesswork in
finding good features.
Finally, with current software, deep
learning architectures are quite flexible.
It could be adapted for
different tasks and domains.
On the negative side,
however, deep learning can require very
large training sets and computing power.
I'm not going to limit its
practicality in some scenarios.
The complexity of implementation could
be considered as one of the negatives of
deep learning and this is the reason that
a number of sophisticated high-level
software packages have been developed
to assist in the development of
deep learning architectures.
Also, despite the faces example we
saw earlier which gave clear easy to
interpret features in most cases,
often the features and
weights of typical deep learning systems
are not nearly so easy to interpret.
That is, it's not clear why or
what features led a deep learning
system to make a particular prediction.
Well, scikit-learn with the MLP classifier
and MLP regressor classes provides
a useful environment to learn about and
apply simple neural networks.
If you're interested in getting a deep
understanding of deep learning and
the software tools required to use it,
we've provided some links
to additional resources.
In particular, software packages
usable with Python include Keras and
Lasagne which in turn use libraries
that include TensorFlow and Theano.
Deep learning typically requires not only
significant volumes of data for training,
but also significant computation.
Turns out that the processor inside video
cards called GPUs are high-performance
graphical processing units
are well-suited to large scale,
highly paralyzed
high-performance computing.
Because they can do high key underlying
like matrix multiplication very quickly.
This is because they are designed to
process large volumes of data from memory
as you might do for
streaming video, for example,
and they have many high speed registers
that can operate in parallel on this data.
Unlike scikit-learn which
cannot currently exploit GPUs,
these deep learning libraries could
make full use of GPU clusters for
large scale learning of deep
learning architectures.